---
layout: post
title: Binary Search Tree
feature-img: "img/sample_feature_img.png"
excerpt: Hell yeah! Who needs regular trees when you have a binary one? Seriously though, binary is the new black.
---

###Overview

Let's talk trees, a binary search tree (BST) is an oft talked about data structure in the computer science realm. BSTs are also commonly referred to as ordered or sorted binary trees and have some special properties that differentiate them from regular trees. 

  - The first/top node is called the root.
  - Each node contains and key and up to 2 subtrees.
  - The leaves of the BST have no key.
  - The left subtree of a node holds keys that are strictly less than that node's key.
  - The right subtree of a node holds keys that are strictly greater than that node's key.

As described above, a node in a BST is very similar to a node in a doubly linked-list in that each node holds a value and references to two other nodes. In the case of a BST the references are to 'left' and 'right'. Another interesting thing about BSTs can be gleaned from the fact that the nodes to the left and right of a node are strictly greater or less than, there can be no duplicate values. 

###Implementation

We'll start with a pretty straight forward description of a binary search tree and add to it through pseudoclassical paterns.

{% highlight js %}

function BinarySearchTree() {
  this._root = null;
}

{% endhighlight %}

Now that we have our function we can start adding some methods, we'll start with add! We can break what goes on below into discrete steps. When we first want to add a node to the tree, we check if the tree is empty, if it is empty we establis the node we are adding as the _root. If the tree was already populated we go through a rather complicated sequence that checks the current value of the node being passed in compared to what's already in the tree and placing the node on the correct side. 

{% highlight js %}

BinarySearchTree.prototype.add = function (value) {
  var node = {
    data: data,
    left: null,
    right: null
    };

  var currentNode;

  if (this._root === null){
    this._root = node;
  } else {
    currentNode = this._root;

    while(true){
      if (data < currentNode.data){
        if (currentNode.left === null){
          currentNode.left = node;
          break;
        } else {
           currentNode = currentNode.left;
          }
      } else if (data > currentNode.data){
        if (currentNode.right === null){
          currentNode.right = node;
          break;
        } else {
            currentNode = currentNode.right;
          }
      } else {
          break;
        }
    } 
  }  
}

{% endhighlight %}












