---
layout: post
title: Stacks on Stacks on Stacks
feature-img: "img/sample_feature_img.png"
---

Let's talk about stacks. No, not that wad of bills you made last time you were in Vegas, the data structure. To be more precise, a stack is an abstract data type with two main operations. These two operations are often called Push and Pop, to put a value or element into the stack, and taking that value or element out of the stack.

##Benefits

While a stack is not the fanciest of ADTs it has certain real-world analogies (e.g. parking in a single-lane driveway, last one in, first one out), as well as similarities to underlying software engineering properties (e.g., undo functionality).

With regards to time complexity, pushing and popping are both O(1). 

##Implementations

Using the Javascript language, implementation of a stack may seem incredibly trivial. The array already has push and pop methods for pete's sake! Well using an array to implement a stack is cheating, you heard it here first, folks. Let's talk a look at some JS code below to show everyone a DIY stack.

In true pseudoclassical function, here we are establishing our constructor!

{% highlight javascript %}

var Stack = function() {

  this.top = null;
  this.size = 0;

};

{% endhighlight %}

Next, lets take a look at what we will be instantiating at each position in the stack. Each node is going to take a value argument, each node will also contain a property, previous, that will point to the node pushed in after it.

{% highlight javascript %}

var Node = function(value){
  this.value = value;
  this.previous = null;
};

{% endhighlight %}

At this point, we will go ahead and establish our two methods, push and pop.

{% highlight javascript %}

Stack.prototype.push = function(value) {
  var node = new Node(value);
  node.previous = this.top;
  this.top = node;
  this.size++;
};

Stack.prototype.pop = function() {
  temp = this.top;
  this.top = this.top.previous;
  this.size--;
  return temp;
};

{% endhighlight %}